Headless remote-chrome notifications: feasibility study
2026-10-02 | Snap -> private test environment | production HEAD 9c9256f

Implementation roadmap update: roadmap.txt supersedes the initial release
scope and effort estimate below. Its first milestone resolves the actions
capability contract with a real callback path. The experiments here remain
evidence of compatibility, not proof of full protocol conformance.

Decision

Proceed with a narrowly scoped fallback notification endpoint for the usual
single Starship-to-Snap session. Target the org.freedesktop.Notifications
D-Bus contract and capability negotiation. The tested browser selected the
native backend, and the unchanged forwarder/listener produced the expected
local notification arguments, including supported markup. The missing
endpoint is a practical fix for headless native notifications.

The main implementation cost is ownership and cleanup. A fallback on Snap's
normal user bus owns a session-wide service name. Quickshell does not preempt
it automatically. The initial design should use the existing office handoff:
run remote-chrome stop on Snap before using Snap's desktop, releasing the
fallback together with the incoming remote session. Seamless coexistence with
a newly started desktop requires additional design and acceptance testing.

Budget approximately one working day for a bounded implementation, lifecycle
tests, documentation, and real Snap/Starship acceptance. This is an engineering
estimate, not a measured delivery time. Transparent desktop takeover, multiple
simultaneous headless sessions, and interactive notification callbacks should
be estimated separately.

Compatibility boundary

Implement the standard service/object/interface, method signatures, returned
notification IDs, close/replacement semantics, and supported signals. Use
GetCapabilities and successful protocol calls to establish readiness. Retain
browser/server versions as diagnostic and experiment metadata; do not pin
Chrome or branch behavior on its version number.

The core methods and capability negotiation are present in the published
2010 specification and remain in the current specification. That supports
expecting a stable compatibility boundary, without assuming that every
browser's choice of required optional capabilities is fixed forever. Keep
protocol-level checks independent of a particular Chrome release, plus a
real-browser interoperability check using whichever supported Chrome is
installed. Unknown optional hints/capabilities should not break the service.
The body/actions requirement observed below describes the tested client's
native-backend selection; it is not a universal minimum imposed by the spec.

Current live diagnosis

Snap's normal user bus and Chrome's existing filtered proxy both had no owner
for org.freedesktop.Notifications. The installed Plasma activation service
executes plasma_waitforname; journal evidence showed it timing out because
no notification service appeared. The current relay observes Notify calls;
it cannot provide the missing service itself. The Starship listener was alive
with markup enabled, but its log contained only the startup entry.

Being headless is not inherently incompatible with native notifications. A
notification service must implement the required D-Bus interface; it need not
draw a window. Chrome uses its own notification windows when no acceptable
native backend initializes. Exposing the name through xdg-dbus-proxy alone
does not create that backend. The README/usage statements that the existing
proxy permission prevents fallback need qualification when implementing this
fix: an available, compatible service is also required.

Experiment setup

- Google Chrome 154.0.8037.97 on Snap.
- Source launcher SHA-256:
  bb604a453ec77f49bc219d121d2d368897dedd68fc3bd6304e8ac3c4191765cf
- Private D-Bus socket under a newly created study-only /tmp directory, with
  no service activation directories or systemd activation configured.
- KWin virtual Wayland compositor on its own socket and isolated XDG paths.
- Disposable Chrome profiles and a localhost-only HTML page. Notifications
  were created through the actual Web Notification API after granting the
  disposable origin permission through local Chrome DevTools Protocol.
- An xdg-dbus-proxy using the production allowlist for Secrets and
  Notifications. The portal remained unavailable in this isolated bus.
- A minimal Python D-Bus endpoint, guarded to accept only study-private bus
  addresses. It implements GetCapabilities, GetServerInformation, Notify,
  CloseNotification, and notification/action signals.
- The exact embedded production forwarder, extracted without modification.
- The production _notify-listener, with capture-only notify-send and a fake
  local capability response. This records the exact command arguments that
  would be sent to the local daemon without displaying a real notification.
- Installed Quickshell with a minimal, offscreen NotificationServer config,
  for desktop ownership/handoff tests. The full DMS configuration was not run.

Observed results

1. An endpoint advertising body and body-markup, but no actions, was queried
   and rejected by Chrome: the webpage received show, but there was no native
   Notify call. Chromium's exact-version source also requires both body and
   actions before selecting this native backend.

2. With no notification owner, a fresh Chrome instance made no native Notify
   call. Starting the endpoint afterward did not repair that running instance:
   a second notification still produced no endpoint call during the bounded
   observation, and the endpoint received no capability/server-info queries.
   Plan to start and verify the service before starting Chrome. Initial
   deployment will require restarting the managed Chrome session once.

3. An endpoint advertising body, actions, and body-markup worked through the
   filtered proxy. Chrome called GetCapabilities and GetServerInformation,
   then Notify with app name Google Chrome, summary/body, a notification ID,
   and default/settings actions. No real desktop was required.

4. The unchanged relay captured that native notification and passed these
   body arguments to its capture-only notify-send:

   <b></b>127.0.0.1:33801<br/><br/>Native body &amp; &lt;format&gt; test

   The existing sanitizer preserved a separate D-Bus markup fixture:

   <b></b><b>Bold</b> <i>Italic</i> <u>Underline</u><br/>A &amp; B

   Chrome escapes markup-like text supplied as a webpage notification body;
   the markup fixture establishes support for protocol-provided formatting.
   This does not mean arbitrary HTML from a website becomes rich HTML.

5. A manual ActionInvoked signal reached the actual webpage click handler,
   and closing the Web Notification reached CloseNotification on the endpoint.
   These prove endpoint compatibility. They do not make the existing relay
   clickable: it drops action information and has no return channel or local
   notification-ID mapping. Remote replacements, expiry, and local dismissal
   synchronization are also outside the current informational relay.

6. ALLOW_REPLACEMENT | DO_NOT_QUEUE (RequestName flags 5) did not steal an
   existing service. A second endpoint received NAME_EXISTS and exited. It
   never became owner after the incumbent exited, proving it was not queued.

7. Quickshell started while the fallback owned the name, reported that it
   would retry after unregistration, and did not preempt it. After fallback
   exit, Quickshell became owner in approximately 40 ms. Starting another
   fallback while Quickshell owned the name preserved that owner.

8. A Chrome instance that initially selected native notifications remained
   running through fallback exit and Quickshell takeover. A subsequent Web
   Notification was relayed successfully through the new notification owner.
   Outstanding notification IDs/callbacks across that transition were not
   tested; preserving every existing notification would need more work.

9. All explicitly spawned test processes exited. A process-list check found
   no remaining study Chrome/compositor/endpoint processes. The production
   Snap Chrome/bootstrap/proxy/forwarder PIDs and Starship tmux Chrome pane
   remained present with their original identities. The real Snap user bus
   still had no notification owner, and Starship's real listener log did not
   gain study deliveries. No production launcher/configuration was changed,
   no live browser was restarted, and nothing was committed or deployed.

Recommended implementation boundary

Start a small fallback only when notifications are enabled and no suitable
notification service exists. Acquire the standard name atomically, without
replacement or queueing; complete capability/server-info readiness before
Chrome starts. Reuse an existing real desktop daemon without owning or
stopping it. Recognize a managed fallback already in use, rather than blindly
treating it as an independent desktop service: initially refuse an ambiguous
second headless session instead of introducing shared-helper lifetime rules.

Tie the fallback to the exact managed bootstrap lifecycle, using the existing
PID/start-time/socket ownership discipline. Every launch failure, ordinary
exit, signal, reset, and incoming stop must release only the owned helper.
Use bounded local readiness checks; a healthy helper should become ready in
well under a second. Report unavailable dependencies or readiness clearly,
and retain the existing secure Secret Service startup requirements.

Implement notification IDs, replacement/close handling, and bounded expiry
state according to the notification protocol. Advertise only capabilities
implemented at that endpoint. The experiment's actions requirement does not
establish end-to-end click support. See roadmap.txt for the callback work
needed before releasing a helper that advertises that capability.

The dependency fit is good on Snap: python-dbus and python-gobject are already
installed. They would be additional remote-host prerequisites elsewhere;
plain Python alone cannot export this service using the existing dependencies.

Before accepting the production fix, validate an actual managed launch using
gnome-libsecret and the real profile, native notification delivery through
the real SSH reverse socket to Starship's DMS, reset/stop cleanup, Chrome
failure rollback, no-notifications behavior, an existing desktop daemon, and
the office incoming-stop handoff. Correct the existing documentation's
unconditional native-backend claims.

Limits and alternatives

The experiment replaced the SSH segment with a private local Unix socket and
captured notify-send arguments. It proves Chrome/backend compatibility and
reuse of the existing relay/formatter, not a fresh SSH/Waypipe transport test
or visual DMS acceptance. The earlier live transport inspection is supporting
evidence only. The test Chrome used --password-store=basic with disposable
profiles; production Safe Storage, wallet unlocking, FIDO, and reboot recovery
were not exercised or altered by this study.

A user-bus fallback is session-wide, so non-Chrome applications also see it.
While Snap is headless this can be acceptable, but it must exit before normal
desktop notification use. Simply setting ALLOW_REPLACEMENT does not solve
this because Quickshell does not request replacement. Detecting desktop
requests and yielding, or sharing one daemon across multiple managed sessions,
introduces additional lifecycle/routing cases. The current passive monitors
also observe all matching Chrome notifications on the same user bus; this
study does not establish routing isolation between simultaneous sessions.

A Chrome-private bus would avoid taking the global Notifications name, but
would require a complete Secret Service bridge, including session objects,
paths, and signals, or another supported bus-routing mechanism. The current
xdg-dbus-proxy allowlist filters one upstream bus; it does not combine two
buses by service name. Changing that boundary is disproportionate to the
informational-notification fix and is not recommended for the first version.

Reproduction and evidence

Run from the repository root on a host with the dependencies listed above:

  rtk proxy python3 docs/studies/headless-notifications/study.py

The script creates a unique private /tmp directory, prints observations,
records results.json and logs there, and cleans up its owned processes on
success or failure. It retains only disposable scratch files for inspection.
The successful run's evidence is saved in the study directory as an
uncommitted results.json artifact. These fixtures are study tools, not the
proposed production service or a replacement for launcher regression tests.

Primary references

Desktop Notifications protocol: capabilities, methods, IDs, and signals
https://specifications.freedesktop.org/notification/latest-single/

Published 2010 specification and its core protocol methods
https://specifications.freedesktop.org/notification/1.2/
https://specifications.freedesktop.org/notification/1.2/protocol.html

Tested browser's native notification initialization (reproduction evidence)
https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/refs/tags/154.0.8037.97/chrome/browser/notifications/notification_platform_bridge_linux.cc

D-Bus RequestName flags and queue/ownership semantics
https://dbus.freedesktop.org/doc/dbus-specification.html

Quickshell notification server registration and unregistration retry
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/quickshell-mirror/quickshell/master/src/services/notifications/server.cpp

Python D-Bus service objects, methods/signals, and GLib loop
https://dbus.freedesktop.org/doc/dbus-python/tutorial.html
